---
title: "Blogger posts and PDFs that can be embedded, scrolled through, and downloaded"
date: 2026-04-11
slug:  blogger_pdf_embed
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - PDF
  - Blogger
image:
  placement: 3
  preview_only: false 
  caption: 'Blogger and embedded PDF'
canonicalUrl: https://francopasut-en.blogspot.com/2026/04/blog-posts-and-pdfs-that-can-be.html
---

- [1. Blogger and Embedded PDFs](#1-blogger-and-embedded-pdfs)
- [2. Summary of Steps](#2-summary-of-steps)
  - [2.1. Step 1: Upload the PDF to Google Drive](#21-step-1-upload-the-pdf-to-google-drive)
  - [2.2. Step 2: Modify the URL for the preview](#22-step-2-modify-the-url-for-the-preview)
  - [2.3. Step 3: Insert the PDF into Blogger](#23-step-3-insert-the-pdf-into-blogger)
- [3. A Little Gift](#3-a-little-gift)


# 1. Blogger and Embedded PDFs

Is it possible to embed PDF documents in posts published on Blogger without using additional applications?

Perhaps with the ability to scroll through the embedded documents and download them locally?

Absolutely, and the solution is very simple.

Here is a summary of the steps with some additional notes:


# 2. Summary of Steps


## 2.1. Step 1: Upload the PDF to Google Drive

1.  Go to Google Drive and sign in with your Google account.
2.  Upload the PDF document, right-click on the file → Share → set the visibility with something like “Anyone with the link can view.”
3.  Click Copy link.


## 2.2. Step 2: Modify the URL for the preview

Replace *view?usp=sharing* at the end of the link with *preview*, like this:

-   from: <https://drive.google.com/file/d/ID/file/view?usp=sharing>
-   to: <https://drive.google.com/file/d/ID/file/preview>

This change allows Google to display the PDF with a scroll bar.


## 2.3. Step 3: Insert the PDF into Blogger

1.  Log in to Blogger and open the post or page where you want to insert the PDF.
2.  Switch to HTML view (click “HTML” / “Edit HTML”) and paste code like this:

``` html
    <div align="center">
      <iframe 
        src="https://drive.google.com/file/d/IL_TUO_ID/preview" 
        width="95%" 
        height="700" 
        frameborder="0">
      </iframe>
    </div>
```
-   The ID number to enter is the one generated by Google Drive in the sharing URL.
-   Adjust *width* (e.g., 95%, 640, etc.) and *height* (e.g., 700) based on the site’s *layout*.
    
    Keep in mind that the higher the *iframe* value, the less frequent the scrolling will be within the PDF.


# 3. A Little Gift

Anyone who has read this article and tried to view the embedded document will find a little gift: a detailed analysis of Frédéric Chopin’s Nocturne Op. 9 No. 1, created especially for this occasion!

The score was written  in LilyPond and is from  [Mutopia Project](https://www.mutopiaproject.org/).

The embedded document can be downloaded and used to study the piece.

{{<iframe "misto_musica_testo-en.pdf">}}

Simple link: {{< pdf-link "misto_musica_testo-en.pdf" "Analysis of Chopin's Nocturne No. 1" >}}

Thank you for your attention.

